---
layout: post
usemathjax: true
title: "My research, part 1: geometric evolution equations"
---

I study a particular type of solution to a particular *geometric evolution equation*.
A geometric evolution equation describes how a mathematical object called a manifold (this might sound complicated, but a simple line or a sphere is an example of a manifold) changing shape over time.
What makes the evolution geometric is that the particular way in which the manifold changes depends on the shape, i.e. the geometry, of the manifold at any point in time.

This may sound complicated, and indeed it often is, but we can get a good feel for the topic by looking at some simple examples.
One simple geometric evolution equation describes a type of event that everyone will be familiar with: the diffusion of heat through an object.

## The heat equation

Suppose we have a wire[^1] that has been unevenly heated:

<p style="text-align: center;">graphic 1</p>

We can visualize the distribution of heat throughout the wire by a graph:

<p style="text-align: center;">graphic 2</p>

Now, if we allow time to pass, the heat will rapidly diffuse throughout the wire.
Notice that in some places on the wire, there were points with a lot of heat surrounded by areas with relatively little.
The temperature changed at these points much quicker than it did at points whose temperature was close to the temperature of the surrounding areas.

<p style="text-align: center;">graphic 3</p>

So it seems like a general rule for heat diffusion is that the greater the temperature differential with surrounding areas, the faster the diffusion.
Not too complicated.
But notice that temperature differential between a point and the surrounding areas is reflected in the geometry of the graph!
Points like this show up in the graph as sharp spikes.
The mathematical way to identify this is with the (spatial) second derivative.

<p style="text-align: center;">graphic 4</p>

This idea gives us the *heat equation*, the simplest model of heat diffusion.
The equation looks like this:

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial t} f = \Delta f,$$

where $$f$$ is the function that describes whatever heat distribution the wire has (it's the equation we would use to make the graph).

Don't panic if you're not familar with the notation!
This equation says mathematically exactly what we observed before about how heat diffusion works.

The left hand side is the time derivative of $$f$$, which by definition describes how $$f$$ changes over time.
The right hand side is the (spatial) second derivative of $$f$$, which as we remarked before just tells us how sharp the graph is at a given point.
So if we interpret this equation into English, all it says is that the temperature of the wire is going to change over time, and if a point is surrounded by lower temperature, the temperature will decrease at a rate proportional to how much lower the surrounding temperature is (a corresponding statement holds for points surrounded by areas of higher temperature).


## Geometric Evolution Equations

Now let's forget about the wire and any physical interpretation of heat diffusion, and just think about the graph changing over time according to the heat equation.
What we have is a 1-dimensional manifold (the line that forms the graph) with some geometry (the way that the line curves) and a partial differential equation telling us how the geometry of the manifold changes over time according to the geometry that it already has at a given time.

This is the idea of a geometric evolution equation.
We start with a manifold that has some geometry[^geometry] to describe how it's shaped.
The 


### Footnotes

[^1]: For technical reasons, the wire is infinitely long and perfectly insulated.  Not very reasonable physical assumptions, but a precise understanding of an oversimplified situation is very frequently much more valuable than a vague understanding of a real situation.

[^geometry]: In the case of the graph, we can see the geometry by calculating the second derivative, or just by looking at the shape of the graph, since it's drawn out for us.
    For an abstract manifold, we don't have this luxury; in general a manifold is not sitting inside a larger space the way that the graph sits inside the larger space of the plane on which the graph is drawn.
    We need other tools to describe the geometry of abstract manifolds.
    This is where the *metric tensor* comes in.
    Hopefully I'll have another post on this topic soon.
